Migration to Quarkus (#135)
projectsyn/component-keycloak: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/upgrade-8.x-to-9.x.adoc

= Upgrade from v8 to v9

This guide describes the steps to perform an upgrade of the component from version v8 to v9.

The major component upgrade focus on the Wildfly to Quarkus migration enforced by the Keycloak team as Wildfly will be no longer supported.

> This upgrade contains just the required changes to run Keycloak in the same matter, the former installation does.
> All other changes and refactorings have been postponed to the next major component version.
> No Keycloak DB migration / schema change is going to happen as the application version doesn't change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This upgrade contains just the required changes to run Keycloak in the same manner as the former installation does.
All other changes and refactorings have been postponed to the next major component version.
No Keycloak DB migration or schema change is expected to happen as the application version doesn't change.
```

The component has been based on the https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/codecentric/keycloak[Keycloak Helm chart] and will use the https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/codecentric/keycloakx[Keycloakx Helm chart].
The Keycloakx Helm chart no longer contains the builtin `bitnami/postgresql` database.
To establish the same behavior, the component is paralell parsing the former `bitnami/postgresql` Helm chart.

If you want to know more about, what has changed internaly, check out the explanation xref:explanations/migration-to-quarkus.adoc[Migration to Quarkus].

== Parameter changes

* `charts.keycloak` has been removed, as superseeded by `charts.keycloakx`.

> * `charts.keycloakx` has been added in version `1.3.2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `charts.keycloakx` has been added with version defaulting to `1.3.2`.
```

* `charts.postgresql` has been added in the same `bitnami/postgresql` version `10.3.13` the former keycloak helm chart dependency has been.

> * `monitoring.statistics` and `monitoring.rules` still exist, but no longer have an impact as the equivalent.

Reviewer: Again, my question is: why?

* `helm_values.postgresql` has been moved to `postgresql_helm_values` reflecting the two independent Helm charts.

If you've configured custom values for any of those parameters, make sure to adjust your configurations when upgrading from component version v8 to v9.

== Step-by-step guide

When upgrading the component, the following actions are required if the built-in database is used:

. Do a backup of the built-in database.
+
[source,bash]
----
instance=keycloak
namespace=syn-${instance}

kubectl -n "${namespace}" exec -ti keycloak-postgresql-0 -c keycloak-postgresql -- sh -c 'PGDATABASE="$POSTGRES_DB" PGUSER="$POSTGRES_USER" PGPASSWORD="$POSTGRES_PASSWORD" pg_dump --clean' > keycloak-postgresql-$(date +%F-%H-%M-%S).sql
----

. If a Keycloak theme is used the path needs to be changed from
+
[source,bash]
----
parameters:
  <keycloak instance>:
    extraVolumeMounts:
      theme:

>         mountPath: /opt/jboss/keycloak/themes/<mytheme>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        mountPath: /opt/jboss/keycloak/themes/company
```

    extraEnv:
      KEYCLOAK_WELCOME_THEME:
        value: 'company'
----
+
to
+
[source,bash]
----
parameters:
  <keycloak instance>:
    extraVolumeMounts:
      theme:

>         mountPath: /opt/keycloak/themes/<mytheme>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        mountPath: /opt/keycloak/themes/company
```
